Create usaco-1545 solution (#6311)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/gold/usaco-1545.mdx

---
id: usaco-1545
source: USACO Gold 2026 Contest 1
title: COW Transversals
author: I-Chen Chou
---

> [Official Analysis](https://usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob1_gold_season26contest1.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Official Analysis (C++)](https://usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob1_gold_season26contest1.html)
```

## Explanation

We can use a Disjoint Set Union to represent the friendships of the cows, where each cow is a node and we add directed edges from each cow to their best friend.
The problem states that each cow follows their friend, so it makes sense to represent this with a DSU and unite each cow with their best friend when they aren't
hosting a party.

Since newly established parties don't suddenly disappear and at most change type, the best solution is to process each DSU query (each night) in reverse.
This way, when a cow starts to host a new party on a particular night, when done in reverse, after we've calculated the number of cows at each type of party for a

> particular night, we can simply merge the host cow with their best friend.

Reviewer: i think this explanation is fine, but im not sure if the ordering is the best?

at least in contest, how i thought of it was like
- sets of cows, new party = splitting the set each time in a predictable way
- splitting sets = hard, uniting sets = easier (dsu), --> oh wait we do it in reverse
- dsu to unite cows following the friends, process queries in rev, yada yada

## Implementation

> **Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(M \cdot \alpha(N))$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}((N+M) \alpha(N))$
```

cuz u do up to N dsu unites at the start right

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;
struct DSU {
	vector<int> e;
	DSU(int N) { e = vector<int>(N + 1, -1); }

	int get(int x) { return e[x] < 0 ? x : e[x] = get(e[x]); }

	bool same_set(int a, int b) { return get(a) == get(b); }

	int size(int x) { return -e[x]; }

	bool unite(int x, int y) {
		x = get(x), y = get(y);
		if (x == y) return false;
		swap(x, y);
		e[x] += e[y];
		e[y] = x;
		return true;
	}

> };

Reviewer: to make the green dropdown for templates, you can do

```
// BeginCodeSnip{Disjoint Set Union}
(your template)
// EndCodeSnip
```

also would prefer the [guide impl](https://usaco.guide/gold/dsu?lang=cpp#implementation) but not a huge deal

---
id: usaco-1545
source: USACO Gold 2026 First Contest
title: COW Traversals
author: I-Chen Chou
---

[Official Analysis (C++)](https://usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob1_gold_season26contest1.html)

## Explanation

> When a new party is established, quite often, it is the result of taking some cows from another party. If we think of this as each party having a set of guests attending, this would mean that in many cases, a new party forces a set to be split into 2.

Reviewer 2: Instead of saying "quite often", make the relationship explicit:

> Every time a new party is formed, one of the following happens:
>
> 1. A cow that previously does not attend a party now hosts one; all cows connected to it eventually goes to that party.
> 2. A cow that attends a party hosts a different  party, and causes all cows connected to it to go to this different party.

(Improve the wording yourself; this is just example, also gotta change further down in reverse)

Also--the best friends is a single directional thing but DSU is not directional so I feel like we should make the intuition clear on how that works... the point is that what we maintain is whether they go to the same party, not what party they specifically go to... but im not really a person with good intuition so I'd like @eysbutno to make the final decision here

Reviewer 3: i agree with the first point, second one not so much

Author: implemented

Splitting a set into 2 is difficult to implement, as we need to figure out precisely how to split it. However, if we were to think about processing each query in reverse, then it turns into uniting 2 sets together, which is much easier.

A Disjoint Set Union data structure allows us to unite sets together.

> In particular, once a cow decides to start hosting a party (not simply changing the type), when processed in reverse, after we've completed the query, we can simply merge that cow with their best friend to join the 2 sets together.

Reviewer 2: A bit run-on here. clarify

> In particular, once a cow decides to start hosting a party (not simply changing the type), when processed in reverse, after we've completed the query, we can simply merge that cow with their best friend to join the 2 sets together.

Reviewer 3: wording can definitely improve here its super vague rn

Every cow in that particular party will travel to wherever the host cow goes, so we only need to merge 2 sets together.

> We can use a Disjoint Set Union to represent the friendships of the cows, where each cow is a node. We add edges between a cow and their best friend depending on the situation (as described earlier), and the size() function easily lets us figure out how many cows are attending a particular cow's party.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can use a Disjoint Set Union to represent the friendships of the cows, where each cow is a node. We add edges between a cow and their best friend depending on the situation (as described earlier), and the `size() `function easily lets us figure out how many cows are attending the same party.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can use a Disjoint Set Union to represent the friendships of the cows, where each cow is a node. We add edges between a cow and their best friend depending on the situation (as described earlier), and the `size()` function easily lets us figure out how many cows are attending the same party.
```

Sorry use this one

---
id: usaco-1545
source: USACO Gold 2026 First Contest
title: COW Traversals
author: I-Chen Chou
---

[Official Analysis (C++)](https://usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob1_gold_season26contest1.html)

## Explanation

When a new party is established, one of the following 2 events causes this to happen:
1. A cow hosts a new party, inviting every cow connected to the host cow through friendships. This either invites new cows that a) previously didn't attend a party or b) takes cows that currently attend another party. If the host cow is currently attending a party, then b) happens and the new party's guests are those that followed the host cow if a party is not held. Otherwise,  a) happens, as if the host cow doesn't attend any party, the new party's guests wouldn't have gone to any other party.

> If we think of this as each party having a set of guests attending, this would mean that for b), a new party forces a set to be split into 2. For a), it just creates a completely new set. Splitting a set into 2 is difficult to implement, as we need to figure out precisely how to split it. However, if we were to think about processing queries in reverse, then the problem turns into figuring out which 2 sets to unite, which is easier.

Reviewer: i think the a) and b) terminology is kinda unclear, maybe come up with a specific term for each event? 

also i think we usually spell out numerals < 10

> 2. A cow changed the type of party. We need to figure out the number of cows attending the host cow's party. Once we know the size, everything else is self-explanatory: for each type of party, add/subtract the amount from the number of cows attending as necessary.

Reviewer: i'm a bit confused on what this bullet point means? since you covered the cases for how cow party type counts update when a host creates a new party already

A Disjoint Set Union data structure allows us to unite sets together and figure out the size of a particular set.
Each cow can be a node.
We add edges between a cow and their best friend depending on the situation (as described earlier), and the `size()` function easily lets us figure out how many cows are attending the same party.

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}((N+M) \alpha(N))$

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

// BeginCodeSnip{Disjoint Set Union}

struct DSU {
	vector<int> e;

> 	DSU(int N) { e = vector<int>(N + 1, -1); }

Reviewer: surely just use constructor

	int get(int x) { return e[x] < 0 ? x : e[x] = get(e[x]); }

	bool same_set(int a, int b) { return get(a) == get(b); }

	int size(int x) { return -e[x]; }

	bool unite(int x, int y) {
		x = get(x), y = get(y);
		if (x == y) return false;
		swap(x, y);
		e[x] += e[y];
		e[y] = x;
		return true;
	}
};
// EndCodeSnip
int main() {
	cin.tie(0)->sync_with_stdio(0);
	int n;
	cin >> n;
	vector<int> frnd(n + 1);          // each cow's best friend
	vector<char> hosted(n + 1, '0');  // what party each cow is hosting

> 	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) { cin >> frnd[i]; }

Reviewer: is there any reason to 1 index here? guide code usually 0 indexes but it's not a huge deal

---
id: usaco-1545
source: USACO Gold 2026 First Contest
title: COW Traversals
author: I-Chen Chou
---

[Official Analysis (C++)](https://usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob1_gold_season26contest1.html)

## Explanation

> When a new party is established, one of the following 2 events causes this to happen:

Reviewer 2: The last part of this sentence is sort of incoherent.

> 1. A cow hosts a new party, inviting every cow connected to the host cow through friendships. This either invites new cows that a) previously didn't attend a party or b) takes cows that currently attend another party. If the host cow is currently attending a party, then b) happens and the new party's guests are those that followed the host cow if a party is not held. Otherwise,  a) happens, as if the host cow doesn't attend any party, the new party's guests wouldn't have gone to any other party.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a new party is hosted, the host invites every cow connected to it through friendships. This results in one of the following changes happening:
1. The cows added previously did not attend a party, and are now attending this host's party.
2. The cows added were in the party the host was previously attending, and are now attending the host's party.
```

or something like this? rn it reads a bit weird imo

> 1. A cow started to host a party. The new party invites every single cow that is connected to the host cow through friendships. This either invites new cows that previously didn't attend a party (1) or takes cows that currently attend another party (2). This is entirely dependent based on whether the host cow is currently attending a party. If that is the case, then (2) happens, as the new party's guests follows wherever the host cow is going if a party is not held. Otherwise,  (1) happens, as if the host cow doesn't attend any party, then per the problem constraints, the new party's guests wouldn't have gone to any other party.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. A cow hosts a new party, inviting every cow connected to the host cow through friendships. This either invites new cows that a) previously didn't attend a party or b) takes cows that currently attend another party. If the host cow is currently attending a party, then b) happens and the new party's guests are those that followed the host cow if a party is not held. Otherwise,  a) happens, as if the host cow doesn't attend any party, the new party's guests wouldn't have gone to any other party.
```

> If we think of this as each party having a set of guests attending, this would mean that for (2), a new party forces a set to be split into 2. For (1), it just creates a completely new set. Splitting a set into 2 is difficult to implement, as we need to figure out precisely how to split it. However, if we were to think about processing each query in reverse, then the problem turns into figuring out which 2 sets to unite, which is easier to deal with.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we think of this as each party having a set of guests attending, this would mean that for b), a new party forces a set to be split into 2. For a), it just creates a completely new set. Splitting a set into 2 is difficult to implement, as we need to figure out precisely how to split it. However, if we were to think about processing queries in reverse, then the problem turns into figuring out which 2 sets to unite, which is easier.
```

A Disjoint Set Union data structure allows us to unite sets together and figure out the size of a particular set.
Each cow can be a node.
We add edges between a cow and their best friend depending on the situation (as described earlier), and the `size()` function easily lets us figure out how many cows are attending the same party.

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}((N+M) \alpha(N))$

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

// BeginCodeSnip{Disjoint Set Union}

struct DSU {
	vector<int> e;
	DSU(int N) { e = vector<int>(N + 1, -1); }

	int get(int x) { return e[x] < 0 ? x : e[x] = get(e[x]); }

	bool same_set(int a, int b) { return get(a) == get(b); }

	int size(int x) { return -e[x]; }

	bool unite(int x, int y) {
		x = get(x), y = get(y);
		if (x == y) return false;
		swap(x, y);
		e[x] += e[y];
		e[y] = x;
		return true;
	}
};
// EndCodeSnip
int main() {
	cin.tie(0)->sync_with_stdio(0);
	int n;
	cin >> n;

> 	// taking in input

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

---
id: usaco-1545
source: USACO Gold 2026 First Contest
title: COW Traversals
author: I-Chen Chou
---

[Official Analysis (C++)](https://usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob1_gold_season26contest1.html)

## Explanation
When a new party is established, it is the result of one of these two cases:
1) It forms a completely new group of cows where all of them previously didn't attend any party.
2) It takes some cows from another party. If we think of this as each party having a set of guests attending, a new party forces a set to be split into two.

> Splitting a set into two is difficult to implement, as we need to figure out precisely how to split it. However, if we were to think about processing each query in reverse, then it turns into picking the correct two sets and uniting them together, which is much easier to figure out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a new party is established, one of the following happens:
1. It forms a completely new group of cows where all of them previously didn't attend any party.
2. It takes some cows from another party. If we think of this as each party having a set of guests attending, a new party forces a set to be split into two.

Efficiently splitting a set into two is difficult to implement, as we need to figure out precisely how to split it while updating counts. However, if we were to process each query in reverse, then it turns into picking the correct two sets and uniting them together, which is much easier to implement.
```

A data structure that allows us to pick two sets and merge them together is the Disjoint Set Union.
In particular, once a cow decides to start hosting a party (not simply changing the type), when processed in reverse, after we've completed the query, we can simply merge that cow with their best friend to join the two sets together.

> Every cow in that particular party will travel to wherever the host cow goes, so we only need to worry about merging.

Reviewer: you should clarify this part

i'm assuming you mean that once a cow start's hosting a party (when processing in reverse), we undo this cow's party (sincve we started from the end) by merging it with its friend?

for this to make sense it'd probably be good to mentionn how we construct the final sets/counts in the first place

---
id: usaco-1545
source: USACO Gold 2026 First Contest
title: COW Traversals
author: I-Chen Chou
---

[Official Analysis (C++)](https://usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob1_gold_season26contest1.html)

## Explanation
When a new party is established, one of the following happens:
1. It forms a completely new group of cows where all of them previously didn't attend any party.
2. It takes some cows from another party. If we think of this as each party having a set of guests attending, a new party forces a set to be split into two.

Efficiently splitting a set into two is difficult to implement, as we need to figure out precisely how to split it while updating counts. However, if we were to process each query in reverse, then it turns into picking the correct two sets and uniting them together, which is much easier to implement.

A data structure that allows us to pick two sets and merge them together is the Disjoint Set Union.

> In particular, once a cow decides to start hosting a party (not simply changing the type), when processed in reverse, after we've completed the query, we can simply merge that cow with their best friend to join the two sets together.

Reviewer: this sentence is a run-on i think
